The purpose of this lecture is to answer
some questions about connecting
to a Linux system over a network.
Specifically, this lesson will cover
connecting to a virtual machine
over a network.
If you are using a virtual machine where
you are connecting directly to it or
if you have physical access to a Linux system
or you are able to connect to your
Linux system over the network successfully,
feel free to skip this lesson.
In this lesson you'll learn all the
steps involved in connecting to
a virtual machine that is running
Linux over the network.
We'll talk about the settings needed
in Virtual Box in order to allow for
network connections.
You'll also learn how to check if
the Linux system is ready to accept
network connections and if not,
how to prepare it for those network connections.
If you're trying to access a
virtual machine that is running
on your system, the easiest way is to
simply start up the virtual machine
and interact with it through VirtualBox.
For this course, there really is no need
to connect to the virtual machine over
the network. I really recommend just
typing into the virtual machine
directly for this course.
Here's an example. I've went ahead
and started VirtualBox on my local
machine or my 'host' system and I have
a VirtualBox that is running.
I'm simply going to open this VirtualBox
and you can see that it's in a window,
in a VirtualBox window.
You can see the menu options from VirtualBox itself.
So what I'm going to do is simply click
into this virtual machine and then interact
with it as if it were a real, physical Linux machine
that I'm sitting in front of.
You know, I can do things like
start a terminal or start a web browser
and I can, ya know, just type right into this system.
That's really how I recommend you
go through this course, but again,
this lesson is for those of you that want to
connect to a virtual machine like this over the network.
If you are one of those people that want to
connect to the virtual machine that is
running on your computer,
you need to do a couple of things
that you may, or may not, have been
introduced to at this point.
Unless you have a compelling reason to do so,
I would suggest waiting until you finish
the other lessons in this course before
continuing with this lesson.
The first thing you need to check is
the network configuration of
the virtual machine in VirtualBox.
Make sure that the virtual machine is stopped,
otherwise you will not be able
to change the configuration
if you need to do so.
I'm going to highlight the virtual machine
and click on 'Settings'.
So here's the machine (virtual machine)
that I'm working with and I can click
on 'Settings' up here, or I can even
right-click and click 'Settings' here.
What we want to do is make sure that the
network adapter is set to 'Bridged'.
I'll go here and click on 'Network' and
we can see that it says it's set to 'NAT'
-- it's attached to NAT, so I'm just
going to select 'Bridged Adapter'.
You can make this work with NAT
in conjunction with port-forwarding but
it's just simpler to use bridged networking
in most cases, especially if you are
working on a typical home network.
Bridged networking allows the
virtual machine to exist on the network
just like any other machine.
It makes it most act like actual hardware.
So now that you have bridged networking
configured, you can go ahead and start
the virtual machine.
I'll click 'OK' to save my changes
and then right-click and 'Start'.
Unless auto-login is configured,
you'll have to enter a username
and password to get access to
the Linux system.
So, to get back to a Linux system
over the network, you need to make sure that
a SSH server is installed and running.
We can check that by looking at
the process table.
Let's go ahead and open a terminal.
We can look at the process table
by using the 'ps' command.
In this example, I'm going to use ps -ef
I'm going to pipe that to grep
and I'm looking for sshd
which is the SSH daemon, or the SSH server process.
So, in this case, no sshd process is running.
We just see the grep command that we just ran
but no sshd process.
Let's check to see if it's even installed.
This is an Ubuntu system so
I'm going to use the dpkg command to
look for a SSH server.
I'm going to use -l to list the installed packages
and I'm going to grep for 'ssh-server'.
If this were a RedHat-based system,
I would run rpm -qa to query the
packages that are installed and list them all,
and then grep  for 'ssh-server'.
Since this is not a RedHat-based system,
rpm isn't installed.
But at any rate, when we look -- when we listed
the packages, we had no SSH server packages returned.
So that means SSH is not installed.
On a Ubuntu system, what I need to do
first is run sudo apt-get update
After I've done the apt-get update,
I'm going to run sudo apt-get install
openssh-server openssh-client
Uh, I'll make sure that the SSH client is installed
so I can connect to other systems
from this system, if I need or want to.
I'll go ahead and answer 'yes' to
any of these questions here.
In just a second, you'll see that it gets installed.
If I were on a RedHat-based system
like RedHat or CentOS or Fedora,
I would use sudo yum and
install openssh-server and
openssh-clients
Remember that the important thing here
is that you install software
with root privileges.
So if sudo isn't configured, you
would need to su to the root user
and then run the apt-get or yum commands.
So now let's look at the process table
and check for sshd
OK, now that we can see that sshd
is in fact running.
If it wasn't running, I would start it with
sudo service ssh start
and that's for an Ubuntu system.
On RedHat, it's slightly different:
it's sudo service sshd start
but in our case, it's running
so I don't need to do this.
So now that sshd is installed and running
we need to know the IP address
of this, uh, virtual machine.
To get that information, we can
run the /sbin/ip addr command
In this example, there are two network interfaces.
You can see 1: and then some information
and then a line that starts with 2:
and that is the second network interface.
The first network interface is a
virtual network interface that will be
present on all systems.
It's called the loopback device.
It allows the system to communicate with itself.
Also, it always has the IP address of 127.0.0.1
The other network interface is the one
that we want to pay attention to.
So we'll look at the inet line here
and what appears before the forward slash
is the IP address.
On my system, it's 10.0.0.6
On your system, it's probably
going to be something else.
Finally, let's go ahead and confirm
our username with a whoami command.
And in this case, it's 'adminuser'.
Many times, SSH access is disabled
for the root user for security reasons.
So you'll have to connect to this system
with a different user.
So if you try to connect to system
as root, and it doesn't work,
this is probably why.
You'll also need to know the password
for the account, and in this case,
on my system, with the image
I'm using, the username is 'adminuser'
and the password is 'adminuser' as well.
Again, this username and password
will vary from system to system, of course.
My physical computer,
or my host computer, is also running Linux.
In your case, it will probably be
Windows or Mac.
I'm going to open up a terminal
and attempt to connect to the Linux system
that is running in VirtualBox.
If you're on a Mac, this is the exact same process.
Let me go ahead and open up my terminal.
I'm going to run the SSH command:
I'm going to run ssh and then provide
the username, uh, on the remote system.
So on my local system, my username
is Jason, but that's not what is on
the remote system, so I have to supply it explicitly.
So I'm going to type in 'adminuser'
use the "at" symbol and then
I'm going to take the IP address
that we got from the ip addr command.
So in this example, it's 10.0.0.6
and of course, on your system
it will probably be something different.
It prompts me to verify the key.
I'm going to say 'yes'
and then I need to enter the
adminuser's password
and I hit Enter and here I am,
I'm logged into the virtual machine.
I'm going to go ahead and just exit out
of the virtual machine and I'm going
to demonstrate the use of Putty
for the, uh, people connecting with Putty,
on Windows machines.
I'm just going to start Putty here --
I have Putty installed on my Linux system.
To connect via Putty, I'll just click
in the Host Name section here
and enter the IP address of our virtual machine.
In this example, it's 10.0.0.6
and I'll go ahead and click 'Open'.
Here you can see that Putty is
asking you to confirm the host key
and we'll go ahead and click 'Accept'
and now, we need to type in our username,
which is 'adminuser' for my system
and then the password
and then so now you can see we've
successfully logged into this virtual machine
over the network, using Putty.
In this lesson, you learned how to connect
to a Linux virtual machine over the network.
You learned that first, you need to
set the network adapter settings
to bridged networking mode.
You also learned how to make sure
that a SSH server is installed and running.
Next, you were able to get the
IP address of the Linux system
by using the ip addr command.
Keep in mind that you may need
to log into the system using an account
other than the root account.
Finally, you used the desired account
and IP address to connect to the system
over the network, using a command-line utility,
such as SSH on a Mac or Linux system
or using Putty on a Windows system.